Hey, VIP friends. We just finished day two of
the emotion... I mean, we haven't finished it.
We're just starting day two in so many ways, but we just finished the general
session. I was reading through the chat here.
Um, Jen, I'm going back to your comment because you said
that you had lost your dad in December.
I, I remember hearing about that, I'm so sorry for your loss,
and thought of 10 things pretty quickly that I'm grateful for that have
happened in and through that
experience. Amazing, right?
It... Here's the thing. Our... what it is,
no matter what it is, always contains upsides and
downsides, and there will always be
treasures in there. If you look around, you'll find
them, and that's what the challenge is for.
Let's see. "Love the creation cycle." Yes,
Rose. That's ... It's good, isn't it?
It's powerful to know what's going on.
Um,
peace is key. Yes, Robin, I agree.
Okay. Most of it is just you guys chatting with each other, and thank you for
doing that. I get busy presenting the content, and you
guys are taking care of each
other.
Okay,
here we go. Uh, I can get lost in that, but I'm going to come
back to where we are. Um, I promised
you as a group of VIP attendees that I
will be making introductions to some of my friends, some
special guests.
And I realized something,
that sometimes I look out to the
National Speakers Association, you know, the professional
speakers that I've gotten to know over the years and that I'm friends with, and
they're always on the stage and doing amazing things, or
authors or people who've been on my podcast, and
I've got some cool friends, coaches that I've trained.
And it occurred to me
that sometimes some of the most brilliant gems are right
next to you. And I'm going to
ask, Natasha, would you come on
camera with me? Can we have a little chat here
together? You guys, Natasha
Visser. Um, we'll see if we can get her
connected through her camera.
There you go.
There she is. Hello, Natasha.
Hello. Hi, Dr. Paul.
Okay. I, I just have to edify you for a few
minutes, and then I would love to chat with you about what was sticking and
clicking from today's content for you.
Um-
Yeah
... Na- Natasha Visser is one of the true
heroes
in, in my life. And I think you found me
originally on YouTube. Is that correct?
Yes.
Natasha, you were out there looking on YouTube for something I had done a video
about. It was probably raising teens or something.
And you found out that I was doing some things that really resonated
with your heart and mind.
Mm-hmm.
And, you guys, Natasha is a
professional counselor in South
Africa.
She has become one of the premier
executive coaches on the
planet. And, and I know that because
I've watched her coaching. Her clients give me
feedback, 'cause she works here in our Live on Purpose
organization, providing private coaching to
executive level clients, and she is doing a phenomenal job with
that. Not only that, Natasha runs
much of what happens on the back end here at Live on Purpose
and has become, just an
invaluable member of our team at Live on Purpose.
And Natasha, I appreciate you so much, and I've come to know and
love you and your family. You've been in my home twice.
Got on an airplane for a long time to get
to Utah. You've been part of our Positivity Artisan group,
and, we, we have some grand adventures
together. I am so
thankful that you're willing to join me today as a special
guest. You're always here behind the scenes,
and today I just want to illuminate the
brilliance that is Natasha Visser.
Let's welcome Natasha, everybody. Welcome.
Oh, that's a bit much. Thanks, Dr. Paul.
It's an honor to know you and be part of your journey, so thanks for inviting me
today.
I don't, I don't think I can say too much good stuff
about you- ... and the good that you're doing in this world, the lives
and relationships that you have saved through your intentional
efforts, and the beautiful family that you're raising.
I just think the world of you, Natasha.
Thank you.
And, and I'm glad to share you with our VIP family here
today.
Yes.
Talk to me about what's clicking and sticking for you
on, on what w- what we covered today, the creation process
mostly.
Okay. Yes, so let's-
Lay it to me
... and so, yeah, so, I actually was thinking of telling a story
today, and then you already brought something up that I want to add
to that, 'cause you were talking about a car and crossing the
street and putting on your safety belt.
So I wanna tell a story, if that's okay, that comes, fits into this creation
process-
Mm-hmm
... that I, that
s- changed my life. And I help a lot of clients to help the
paradigm shift, all that, to think differently about it with your model, the
positivity model, about our emotions 'cause this is our emotional
challenge. So let's think about a car.
Now, we had a little red Beetle Volkswagen
car. Go- You g- guys remember the old red ones?
Yeah.
The... We had a red one, but that old ones, the way the engine was at the back
and the
You know that old Volkswagen Beetles.
Okay, so we had one of those when I was a student.
So my brother, my sister and I, we shared this little red Beetle,
making turns driving to university and back when we were studying.
Now, this little old beaten down Beetle ha- was a,
like, a very special one. My d- mom called him Foxy.
That was his, like, special name. So there's special attachment to this
car. But this car's, gas speedometer never
worked,
so it was stuck and the gas light was on, like, all the
time. So we- my dad tried to fix it, couldn't fix it,
so as we were driving to university and back, we never knew how much fuel or
gas was in this tank. Now, how many st- many of you would
feel a little bit apprehension? Uh, fear?
Yeah.
Driving, not knowing how much gas is in the tank.
That's a little bit scary, so
it... We would actually agree that, the fuel gauge,
the gas ga- light is a good thing to have.
But if it's working and it goes on, it's like, "Ah, I need to put in gas again,"
or, "Let's see how far I can go." But actually living without it
makes life much more worse, okay? 'Cause we would actually have
gratitude for our gas light going on.
Now, I have a special gratitude for a gas light 'cause,
in my life I've, driven a car a few years without a gas light that worked.
So I want to use that analogy
as our car for... The car is our body.
Our bodies is the car, and the gas light is our
emotions. Now, we all, we are here for our emotions, how to
better understand our emotions, and I think most of us is here, if
we look at your model, we are discontent about our emotions.
Maybe we are angry that that gas light is going on, or maybe check the
engine light. But what if we change that and be
grateful for having that indications, knowing
that, oh, I'm running out of gas? And something that you just
said, Dr. Paul, is, like, ignoring risk increase
danger. If we ignore that gas light or
check the engine, the car, it's g- the risk is going to be greater.
We're going to get stuck next to the road.
So I want to ask you, how many times do we ignore our
sadness? 'Cause, you know, I need to be strong for the kids, I shouldn't
cry.
Mm.
How many times do we ignore our anger or frustration?
We say, "No, that's bad emotions." And then we are
victims, if we look at your choice, we are victims to
our emotions. 'Cause we shouldn't feel that, we should ignore that.
But what if we embrace our emotions and say, every emotion has a
helpful purpose, has a purpose, is telling us something.
'Cause the gas light that goes on tells us something.
Go and... Go to the next one
where we need to find a plan where we're going to get gas.
Let's refuel our engine. 'Cause maybe if I'm sad,
maybe the light is saying, "Let's cry."
Mm.
And when we're angry, maybe somebody is violating our
boundaries. So we tend to ignore it and not going to
work. So the hard work of this emotional process,
in your process that you just showed, the creation, is to learn the
meaning of our emotions
and what actions we can take with not ignoring our emotions.
'Cause if we put a little tape over it or it's not working forever,
like, like my car that I drove, we're
going to get stuck next to the road.
I did get stuck next to the road a few times.
I am extremely grateful for a gas light that's going
on. So my paradigm has shifted, 'cause I found
gratitude in my gas light. So what if we found
gratitude in our emotions
and say, "Wow, it's telling us something"?
And now we can say, "If not this, then what?" Go to that
question, then have a plan to go and put in your gas.
Maybe come to this, come to coaching, come and learn from Dr.
Paul on how to learn what's the
meaning of each emotion. That will take some work, and then we can create
that life of peace and hope that we were looking for.
So that's how I put the emotional thing in this creation process,
that you shared and, and I think it's a very powerful,
creation process that you shared.
Thank you for sharing that.
That... Natacha, I love that, because I'm thinking about your
analogy of the gas light. Any kind of a
warning signal or an indicator that something is
off, that is the equivalent of this lightning bolt here.
Mm.
That is the discontent. It's not a bad
thing. We could go disable
all of the warning lights on your car, and then
it would never have a problem, right?
No, it would have a problem and you wouldn't be able to fix it in time, and you'll
be broken down on the side of the road, like you
said, right? So
it's not a bad thing, and I love that you're inviting us
to embrace... You didn't use
that word, but to embrace every feeling
we have-
Mm
... without ignoring. You're a professional counselor.
You're trained
to work with people on that emotional
freedom. Um,
how important is that for us to, to allow ourselves to
feel whatever we're gonna feel?
So the thing is, when we do not embrace or acknowledge that
emotion, what happens is that breakdown happens
into actually, pathology,
where we get-
Yeah
... anxiety disorder. 'Cause if we...
That's when anxiety or depression... 'Cause we're not...
Or any other pathology. Now, I know we're not talking about that, but that's
actually what happens if we just completely ignore it.So I
had, I worked in the, South Africa suicide line, Dr.
Paul, for a few years, and this one call stood out.
This lady called, and her mother passed away.
And she was hysterical on the phone, not because her mother
passed away, but because her sisters and brothers were upset that
she was crying for her mother passing away, and they thought
there was something wrong with her for crying. It's interesting.
So I said, "Well, didn't you feel anything for your mom?" She said,
"No, I loved my mom."
I said, "Well, would it be honorable to not cry for your mom?
Do you honor her memory if you cry?"
And by giving her permission to cry by saying, "You're honoring your
mom's memory", all the tension was gone.
All the disc- all the things that she thought she was doing
wrong that was actually right, she got permission to do that by
acknowledging the emotion.
Yeah.
So emotion, if you break it up, is energy in
motion.
So what if we use that energy
for the correct way? If we are sad, let's mourn what are sad.
Or what... It's when do- when people go through the grief process and they
don't go through the process and they don't cry, they fall into
depression because they didn't cry when they were sad.
That's when the car breaks down. Yeah.
And that-
So that's why that develops
... we come up with all kinds of maladaptive coping strategies for
that-
Yes
... addictions and including destroying our
relationships ... and
failing on our responsibilities.
I mean, things can go south really fast.
Yes.
Um, e- emotional freedom. This is called the emotional
freedom challenge.
Yeah.
And it has nothing to do with being free from
emotions.
Yes, you said it right.
Right?
Yes.
It's really about being free to experience-
Yeah
... the full range of human emotions and not get hijacked by
it.
Yes.
Staying in the driver's seat, and that doesn't mean that you're going to
avoid the emotions. Remember, avoiding means you sit down on this side of the
street, and you don't get to have lunch.
Yeah. You're not enjoying life.
We can manage it. You know, we can find our safety equipment.
Mm-hmm.
Um... Oh, I love it. Natasha,
I knew that that was a good idea, inviting Nick to come in
here.
Yes.
I'm gonna have you continue to listen in,
just in case there's a question that comes up.
You're here in the back office anyway, so-
Yes, I'm still around
... I don't even have to bring you out of the audience. You're right here.
Um, you guys, if you have questions specifically for
Natasha, please feel free to ask 'cause she's here.
She's gonna be with us here in the back room.
Um, let's go ahead and jump into our Q&A
session. I've got a couple of questions in the Q&A already.
You can use the chat
or you can use the Q&A, and some of these are gonna be easy.
Zoela, hello, I'm so glad you're here.
I told you in Facebook that we kept the lights on for you 'cause you've
been here before, and
welcome. Welcome. Glad you're here.
Zoela asks, "Can you please repeat the name of the
author and book about discontent?" You Gotta
Keep Dancing, that is the title as I recall it.
It's on my shelf somewhere probably.
You, You Gotta Keep Dancing by Tim
Hansel. I believe I'm recalling that correctly.
Somebody can
fact-check that and put it in the, in the chat.
Um, Tim Hansel, You Gotta Keep Dancing, and that's the phrase that
stuck out to me. Pain is
inevitable. Misery is
optional. So powerful. I love that I
encountered that before I wrote my book 'cause I quoted it in my
book. Jen, "Do you take new clients?
Work with kids?"
I'm going to qualify that answer. Yes to
both.
Um, I have limited my private
practice
to only the Positivity Artisans
group. This is, um... And, and I used to see
clients all day every day. With everything else that I'm doing,
that's not the best use of my time. I need to multiply my
efforts to have a bigger impact with more people.
And I was just telling Rose this morning,
feed the shepherds. Do you remember that, Rose?
Um, I feel that my job... And I've got a Christian
faith background. One of the things Jesus said
was, "Feed my sheep. If you love me, feed my
sheep." And to me, that al- always sounded like feed my
shepherds. And so I do a lot more work
empowering practitioners
to go serve people than I do in directly serving
people, and I have just a handful of private clients.
Now, having said that, Jen, I do have a couple of seats
available. Here's, here's one way that I would put this,
and I'm getting more clear about this all the time, you guys.
What we offer, and I say we because this takes a team.
Years ago, it stopped being just the Paul show, the lone
ranger out here. I've got a whole team, including Natasha,
who you just met. Jeff was here in the back office just a minute ago.
He had to leave. Um, I've, I've got Lindy.
I've got Ryan. I've got Trichelle.
I've got, I've got a whole team of people who make this
all happen. And what we offer
is peace
in your mind and heart.Confidence
in your roles and relationships and hope
for better things to come. That's the deliverable.
I am really clear about that right now, and that-- you're getting that in
this challenge. This challenge is one method
of getting you there, okay? And I'm, I'm getting more clear about what
I offer in my practice too, because there's three
levels, and at level
one... Think, think of this as different ways to get
there, okay? The deliverable is the same
across all of these. And so when you ask, "Do you take new clients, work with
kids?" Yes,
at one of these levels. Absolutely.
So at the first level is our general membership,
Live on Purpose Central, which we are working on a few
rebranding things that I think you might be excited to learn about
soon, where we provide daily, weekly, monthly
positives. And it's kind of a
consumer-based, get, get
your positives here. We'll deliver them to you every day. Here they are.
And we have a library of courses and, and other
resources that you can have in that level.
Now, take it up a level. This is the practitioner level,
and at the practitioner level, you're not just consuming
these principles. You are practicing
them. And so this is the level where people
who have, have a role where they are a leader
or a coach or a speaker, or they have a chance to
influence the lives of others. And it's all about, I am going to
practice these. I'm a sixth-degree black belt in
positivity, okay? And I don't say that to brag.
I say it to, to mean I practice it daily.
This is all I do all day, every day, when I'm
not on vacation or free time.
That's what I do, okay? I am a practitioner of positivity.
I don't do this on the side, all right?
And some of our practitioners kind of do it on the side or they're exploring,
"Okay, how can I make this more of a practice in my life?
How can I go to that higher level?" This is higher touch, it's higher
ticket.
And then there's the elite level, okay?
And that is personal
coaching. That's where-- So the practitioner
level, you can think of that as maybe a membership, do it yourself,
DIY. And this middle level is done with you.
We're going to get together and do trainings and masterminds, and you get to
work with other people and be part of a community.
And then there's the, we'll hold your hand. We'll walk you through it.
That's high touch. That's high ticket.
It's kind of like when I wanna go see my grandkids.
I'm going to Chicago this weekend.
There's a lot of ways to get to Chicago from Utah, and I could ride my
bike or take a car, right? Or I could get on a
train, maybe one of those high-speed Amtraks, or I could get on an
airplane. And even in the airplane, there's different...
You know, there's economy and there's coach and there's first
class, right? So
when you think about
working with your clients, you might, you might consider
that, all right, there's some, there's some power there,
okay? So yes, I personally
serve clients on the plane, and I work
in this practitioner level with the group,
okay? And I provide content for the
membership down here, but they don't get a lot of personal touch with me.
It's like everybody who's free on,
on, Facebook for this challenge, they're getting to see me
every day, but not interact with me really.
You guys are at the VIP level, okay?
And then there's the, the plane, and we do have a few seats
open in first class. But if you come on the plane with
us, that's private coaching. And yes, that's
available. And I have coaches, including Natasha, that you just talked
to, that you just heard from, who is, one of...
She is our head coach
at Live on Purpose. But we also have Jeff, we have Lindy who
are providing services, and I have a lot of practitioners who we can
call up and in-invite to help us out if the demand grows.
I hope that helped. Did that answer your question, Jen?
And, I think we
had... Yep, Deb, you found it.
You Gotta Keep Dancing by Tim Hansel.
Thank you for grabbing that for us.
All right.
Um, let's see. Eva, you're saying, "Yesterday after our session, I spent a
long time crying. The emotions were very strong as everything
deeply resonated with me."
Yeah. I'm n- I'm not even gonna apologize for that.
I hope that it strikes a chord. This is part of your creative
discontent. "I didn't feel bad, but I became very
aware of how much inner work still lies ahead."
Yes. Yes.
Ooh, and, and my heart goes out to you for feeling what you're
feeling because it's not easy or fun or pleasant
sometimes. But what you just shared, Eva, in your
comment there, and it's in the chat, you guys, if you wanna see it, what you just
shared, Eva, is that there is a, a, a
shift of attitude or position relative to that.
You're seeing it as discontent.
I love that because you've got all of these steps, and if
we go into victim mode, we'll just recycle the discontent and
conclude that our life sucks. It doesn't s**k.
Eva, your life rocks in so many ways, and
I know that without even knowing the details.And here you
are, right? Exactly where you should be, right
on schedule. Love it.
And then you get to decide, okay, what's next?
And then Friday, Friday is all about
what's next because we'll get through this five-day challenge, and then
what? Well, whatever's next for you, and it'll be
different for different people.
Oh, Eva, glad to be on your team.
Um, Robin, you said good stuff been hijacked lately.
That's why coaches need coaches. Yeah. Exactly.
You've heard me say that so many times, haven't ya?
And Robin, I've had the privilege of being your coach for a couple of years
now, and
I, you know I'm constantly working with my
coaches. I owe it to you to hire good
coaches for me, and I just hired another one last
week, and it's stretching me. That's how I
know I'm on the right track, okay? If you feel
comfortable, I'm not a big fan of
comfort. I mean, I like comfort. I'm as addicted to it as anybody
else, but it's usually on the wrong
path, okay? Because growth,
stretching, it, it implies a little bit of pain.
Um, and Natasha, you put the book in the chat too.
I'm coming back to the Q&A here in just a minute.
I'm just, going through the chat here.
All right. Let's see. And Devin, I
saw your note there. Um,
we can talk. Let me know, okay? That was a private
message, I guess. Let's see. Does
Natasha have space in her coaching practice for new
clients? Yes, she does.
And I'm gonna say, she gets busy fast, so I think she only has a few
slots. Natasha, I don't know if you wanna chime in on that.
Um, that's probably a fair answer.
Yes, we... Yeah, that sounds fine. We can ta- chat and see if there's space.
There should be.
Okay. Hey, Natasha, would you drop in the chat the, the
link for a strategy session?
Yeah, let's do that.
We weren't even gonna really talk about what coaching we have available here at
Live on Purpose until, like, day four or five, but
since you're asking, Natasha's gonna put a link into the
chat that allows you to sign up for a strategy
session because we want to make sure on our end that there's a
good fit, that we're providing for you whatever
level of transportation is appropriate for
you,
given where you wanna go. And I think where you wanna go is peace in your mind and
heart, confidence in your roles and relationships, and hope for better things to
come. Well, we got vehicles at all those levels, and I do have a few
seats in first class still. Natasha's on the plane,
okay? Natasha is on the plane. And you'll see her in the
practitioner level and, and at the,
the car level too.
You'll... I mean, we're there, but the high-touch,
high-ticket, we, we see our private clients on the
plane, and I'm, I'm in the first class area.
Again, I'm not saying that to say, "Oh, I'm all that." I'm saying
I've got a lot to do to take care
of the people that I feel a sacred responsibility
and stewardship to take care of, including this
challenge that we're doing. So my time has to be
spent very judiciously. I have a private client right at the top of
the hour, and we're gonna wrap up here so that I can go take care of
her, but that's the first class suite.
It's reassuringly expensive, and
it's high touch. I sit in people's living rooms
at that level, okay? So th- that just hopefully opens
up some possibilities for, for all of you.
Let's see. Is there an appropriate time to
feel and a time to let the emotion go?
Not sure how to ask my question. Carol, that is a really great
question. The appropriate time to
feel
oh, pardon me.
The... And Natasha, if you have, something you wanna say about this, I'd
invite you to comment too. The appropriate time to feel
is when you feel.
Um, I'm also going to refer back to something that I think I mentioned yesterday
about real pain and neurotic pain, and the real pain
is the pain that you feel when you're injured, and that could be emotionally or
physically, doesn't matter. The neurotic pain is the
unnecessary pain that we feel because of the story we
create in our mind about whatever caused the first
pain. And that's when I think we get
into the space of can we choose a different path here?
When is enough, enough? Am I ready to graduate
from this class and move on? Natasha, do you wanna comment about that on Carol's
question?
Yes. Uh, so what comes to mind, if I can still use my analogy, and I want to
comment on what you're, you also said, 'cause the...
it becomes neurotic pain if we ignore the emotion, and
now the car is break, broken down next to the road.
However, if you feel the feel, Carol, and
acknowledge the feel and know what the feel mean, and
you work with that feel, feel, feeling, all
right? Then the feeling will not control you.
The feeling will subside. It will not just go away.
It will... It's like the petrol, the fuel gauge.
If I accept, oh, the gauge is on, now I have a plan.
Work out my route, put in the gas. When the gas is in, I don't
freak out anymore. I don't feel the stress anymore.
The emotion subside naturally 'cause you dealt with
it.It doesn't go away just because we wish it.
We need to deal with it. We need to put in the work in that creation process.
Put in the work, work on that emotion, and then it will
naturally go away 'cause you attend to the, to the light.
So.
Yes. It's... Thank
you. I knew that you would bring additional light and
knowledge with your answer. And, and the thing that I love
about that is
th- that feelings change. You know, I think,
I think I've mentioned before, I, I had a colleague once who made his whole career
off of those two words. Feelings
change. And when we're in it, we don't think that they will.
We think, "Oh, I'm always gonna feel like this." No, you
won't. No, you won't. Look at your life
experience. You feel stuff, you feel it very intensely, and then it
changes.
It's, it's that neurotic process.
See, circumstances are neutral. It is what it
is. Our thoughts about those circumstances
are not neutral, and if we continue to insist, "This is bad,
this is bad, this is bad," and it is compared to something better, but we
don't see that we're making the evaluation, we just are convinced that,
"This is bad, this is bad, this is bad," we're gonna get into
a chronic negative emotional
energy. And so I love the way that you
framed that, Natasha. The signal comes on.
Okay. Notice it, which is like
saying, "Feel your feelings." Whatever you're gonna
feel, just feel it. And then
instead of creating some story where you spin out in discontent,
how about we head down the creation path?
And I've given you the template here, so thank you,
Natasha. And Carol, you acknowledged, yeah,
that, that makes sense. Awesome. Okay, we have an anonymous
question. I have... And by the way, anonymity,
anonymity is totally fine, 'cause this
is our story with your details. All right?
Everybody has some version of this story.
I haven't even read the whole question yet.
But everybody has some version of this story, it's just your
details. "I have a daughter, 13." Okay, already
some people are like, "Oh, okay. Uh, s- enough said," right?
"That has a slight cognitive disability," and your
dreams for your daughter may not happen, "as
girls her age are becoming young women, but she still
acts like and relates to seven to 10-year-olds.
How do you not compare to her age? So when you're
sad about this, how do you not always get down on her for
acting so young, but be there for her emotionally and
not tear her down?"
This is rich.
And I'm glad I said what I did, because this is our story
with your details, and I would just invite all of you who are
here to ask yourself, "How
often
has it turned out exactly the way I pictured
it?" And especially if you're a parent.
You have your kids and you're like, "They're going to be this or that," and you
have this picture in your mind about what your kids should be or how they will
be, and then it's something totally different instead.
The first thing that I want to do, dear anonymous, is
to acknowledge the pain.
And we just had a conversation about let yourself feel whatever you're gonna feel.
How are you supposed to feel
if your 13-year-old has a cognitive
disability, and that is interfering with the
dreams and projections that you had in your mind?
Okay. How are you supposed to feel?
Well, kinda like this. Now, without getting
into the neurotic pain where we form a story, see if this
sounds familiar, that it shouldn't be this
way, that this isn't fair.
This wasn't supposed to happen.
Now, I'm calling that a neurotic story because
who says
that this is wrong?
Did you know, for example, that a certain percentage of
children born on this planet have cognitive
disabilities, to use your term?
Did you know that? Of course you did.
Now, y- you, you have a choice to make. All right?
So the discontent strikes.
"Oh, my daughter has this thing," whatever
this thing is. Okay?
Now you have a choice. Victim or
agent. Let me give you one version of that.
"Why me?" It's said with kinda
whiny voice. I'm not saying you're doing this, I'm just illuminating your
choice. "Why me? Why us? Why... This isn't
fair. What..." That's victim
versus,
"Why not me?
Why not us? A certain number of families are going
to have this. Aren't we just as qualified as they are
to have this?"
What changes
when we ask, "Why not me?" instead of, "Why
me?" I did this. This
is why I feel so passionately about it.
I didn't even share this story with you guys.
I was diagnosed back in 2002, I
remember the day,
with spasmodic
dysphonia.Now that sounds good.
My wife is like, "See, I knew you were a s**z."
Spasmodic dysphonia is similar to Parkinson's
disease,
and it originates in the basal ganglia of the brain.
This is what I've learned about it.
Um,
and it affects my voice.
My voice is my tool of production.
And I went into victim mode when I first started noticing the
symptoms. A-and probably most of you are gonna be like, "What?
You have a voice disorder?" Let me come back to
that. There is no cure
for this. It's a degenerative disease that affects and it
causes spasms in the vocal fo-folds.
Um,
I went into victim mode, "Why
me?" for a couple of
years before I finally got a
diagnosis. When I got the diagnosis, something clicked in
my brain, 'cause the doctor said
there's about 30,000 people in America who
have this,
and that number stuck in my head. I'm like, 30,000 people?
Is that a big number? I don't know. It depends on what I compare it
to. Because I live just a couple of
miles from Lavell Edwards Stadium.
It's a big football stadium that Brigham Young University uses for their
Division I football games. It seats about
60,000 people, so I imagine that stadium about half
full. And I'm like, "Wow, that's a lot of
people." And then I remembered that's in the whole
country. Oh, that doesn't seem like very many now.
And I had been going through in my head, what did I do wrong?
What, how come, why me? 'Cause the why me question is
not helpful,
'cause your brain, your subconscious is gonna come up with some answer to that.
Well, because ... Uh, I just went to my
experience. I'm psychologically disturbed, or maybe I ticked off
God or something. This is a punishment for unresolved sins or some...
I mean, this is the goofy stuff that our brain does when you ask why
me. When I heard that number, 30,000, I had to
ask why them.
Why those 29,999 other people? Why do
they have it? Are they psychologically disturbed?
Do they have unresolved sins? The goofy c**p my brain was giving
me, and I couldn't conclude that about
them. See, we believe that we're a special case.
This shouldn't happen to us. That is neurotic thinking.
And I'm not saying I would wish this on you with your, your 13-year-old
daughter. I'm not saying that, "Oh, yeah, I pick you to do
this." I'm saying, what if you shift your
attitude, your position relative to this, and instead of why me we go to why
not me?
And I have been able to, because I took a different position or
attitude about this, I've been able to help a lot of people with it,
including a young lady that was suicidal who was experiencing the same
condition,
who saw
somebody else who had been diagnosed with it
who's on radio, television, podcasts, on the mic.
I'm a professional speaker. It's what I do.
My voice is my tool of production. Okay, now I'm
not gonna trouble you with the whole story about that, but what we've got here is a
choice. And if you
continue to experience
this is not how it should be, you're in neurotic
pain. Okay? The real pain is when you found
out, because there's a real
loss. And it's not a loss of anything real.
It's a real loss of what you thought it
should have been.
And as long as we hang on to what we think it should have been,
we're not free to accept what it is.
And what it is is rich
in so many ways.
Vicki and I have two,
we've got a niece and a nephew who are both severely
handicapped. The-their special needs are through the
roof, and neither of them is... Well, one of them will
probably get to, you know, 11 and 12-year-old level of
functioning. The other one's gonna be six or seven
his entire life, okay? In, in terms of his
abilities, his cognitive abilities.
And if we were hanging onto, "It shouldn't be this way," we wouldn't be able to
experience the beautiful people that they are, the love that they've brought into
the world
through the way that people interact with them and everything else.
Ah. Rose is saying, "Instead of why me, ask why not
me, and then you can go create better." You know, and for a voice
disorder, I am married to a speech language
pathologist. Who better than me
to have this? I've got resources to deal with whatever
that brings into my life.
And part of the story I'm not sharing with you is that I retired that diagnosis
about a year and a half ago.
Okay, I have to tell you at least a little, right, with that kind of a teaser.
I retired the diagnosis because it no longer
served me. And for a while I was like, I was leading with
that. I would be apologetic, "I have a voice disorder," to try to
explain what was going on with my voice.
People were like, "Are you getting emotional?
Are you about to cry?" And that serves me well
sometimes to make points, but I've learned how to speak
in a way that is very deliberate. I get comments on YouTube all the
time, "This guy is so slow. Listen to him at 2 speed."
You're welcome.Well, I have to be.
That's the only way I can get my voice to work, and it works really well for a lot
of my
audience who aren't native English speakers.
Maybe it's exactly as it should be.
Well, a couple of years ago, I was,
I was in an event where we had a voice coach
who showed up and was doing some processes with us, and I led
with the diagnosis. I had a little private se- chat
with him and I said, "Well, I have a voice disorder." And he said something that
changed it for me. He said, "Well, Dr.
Paul, I hear that you have a voice.
I don't know anything about voice
disorders." And that stuck with
me. See, what if I have a voice
and, and drop the disorder part and my voice sounds like
this? Do I need that diagnosis? I did at the time because I
had goofier stories going on in my head that were causing neurotic pain.
That helped me to vacate some of those stories and move forward with the
creation process. But then I carried that diagnosis
for twenty years, more,
twenty-five. A- and it was
no longer serving me. I was leading with it. I was hiding behind it.
I was using it as an excuse.
And part of my brain was telling me, "Well,
I was given that diagnosis by a bona fide physician who
specializes in..." And then, then I thought, "Well, wait a
minute. He didn't give me that
diagnosis. I bought it. I even saw
the bill. He didn't give me
anything." And then I thought, "If I bought it,
then I can toss it."
That's just how my brain works. And so I no longer
have that diagnosis, and nothing has changed about my
neurology. I just don't need the diagnosis, so I retired
it.
Do you know you have the right to do that?
It was liberating for me.
Um, Crystal, "I feel like I'm not depressed."
Good. That's good news, huh? "I struggle to create
though. Any suggestions?" Yeah.
Practice. Yeah,
there's the process, right? And you're the
creator, so nobody gets to tell you what to create.
You just check your discontent. When you said, "I
struggle to create," that is discontent.
Now, it may not be severe. It may just be, "Okay, how can I phrase this in
a way..." But
whatever it is had you write that in the Q&A.
So notice that, "I struggle to create." Notice that that
zings you a little bit. That's a little bit of a lightning strike, and it
tells me that you aspire to be or want to be or
identify as
a creator. Now, what are you gonna create? I don't know.
You got a choice to make. First,
victim. "Uh, I'm just not a good creator.
I guess I'll plop down right here and..." Or, "Huh,
I wonder what I can do about that. Well, if not this, then what?
Then I become a powerful creator."
All right. Well, what would that look like? How...
And you start to create it here. What would that version look like for
me, for Crystal?
And then you'll have some work to do, and make sure that you
find, you know, you find whatever tools you need a- and put
in your safety measures in place. You might wanna get
some instructions or some mentors or some coaching
because this is not easy. None of this is easy, by the way.
If you want easy, you gotta go somewhere else.
If you want what works, stick
around. Can you manifest something
different? Absolutely. And it's going to take some practice.
In fact, I'm coming back to this on Friday 'cause I've got another fun little
analogy for you. Okay? Um, Friday will be my
favorite day of all of them. Um,
today is my favorite. Uh, every one's my favorite day.
Okay.
Let's go to Charmelle. "Lost an aunt in
January." I'm sorry for your loss.
It's hard to lose people, but spoiler alert, nobody gets out of
this alive. So either you're gonna lose people or your people are gonna lose
you. W- it's gonna happen, right?
And feel whatever you're gonna feel.
"And why don't I feel sad? Why am I so
okay she died now going on with life?
Feel like I am so hard-hearted." Yes, you hard-hearted
soul, Charmelle. I really
doubt that you're hard-hearted.
It's interesting because the emotional journey that we
have
is so idiosyncratic, it is so specific to
each individual and to every
relationship. Um,
how did you feel-- Charmelle, how did you feel when my grandmother
died?
Oh, wasn't even a blip. Less than your
aunt. Why? 'Cause you had zero
relationship with my grandmother. Well, guess what?
I felt it,
and I felt it differently
than I did when my brother died.
My brother, it was a call from my dad. It was 6:00 in the morning.
Dad never calls at 6:00 AM. What's going on? It must be mom.
He tells me my brother just died. My brother
was thirteen months older than
me.Just up and died
all of a sudden. My grandmother, it happened over a period
of eight years, including dementia and
Alzheimer's. And when mom called me that grandma had died, I was
like, "Oh, good."
What is wrong with me? I'm right with you.
I am so hard-hearted. No. See, it, it, it
depends on so many factors. So whatever you feel is perfect
for you.
And what I've found is if we choose to love people, we get to
experience pain, and the more we love them, the more pain we
feel on the loss. So I
don't know any of the details about your aunt, but what I can tell you, Charmelle,
is that you are right on schedule, and whatever
you feel is perfect for you. Now, there are
times when, because we get used to avoiding the
pain, that we start to shut out the
emotions. And as a professional psychologist, I've dealt with that my whole
career, you know, as I help people work through more
emotional freedom, which doesn't mean being free
from emotions. It means being free to feel them
all, and it'll surprise you sometimes.
There may be a time, Charmelle, where it's just like, it just hits you or
not, and either way is fine.
And be curious about it, but not judgmental.
Be curious. "Huh, that's interesting.
I wonder what that's about." And just your question reflects
that you are wondering. I think being in the question is really helpful.
Um, Jen,
"I've been given an MDD and GAD diagnosis and have utilized many
modalities to alleviate symptoms and
pain."
Yeah. Cool. I mean, the diagnoses, you wanna
keep them? That's up to you. You bought them.
Were-- And you weren't given them.
Can we be clear about that? Nobody can give you a diagnosis.
If they give you a diagnosis, they're going to give you a bill too.
You are buying it.
Play with that, Jen. I want you to just kind of play with that, see what your
brilliant mind does with that. Um,
"I've used-- utilized many modalities to alleviate symptoms and pain, work through
and function, et cetera," yes. "I would love to retire those diagnoses."
Yes, I'm with you on that, unless they serve you well.
I mean, if they serve you well, keep them.
I kept mine for a while, longer than I needed to.
It, it had outworn its usefulness within the first couple of
years, and I just kept it because somebody gave it
to me, right? I have this diagnosis.
No, I don't. I, I retired it. I, I tossed it.
I didn't need it anymore. Um, "While
probably still saying a myth, explain more how you retired
yours." I will pr- I'm gonna defer some of
that, Jen. I think I've shared some, some of that with
you. It really is about changing my position
or attitude toward it. See, my attitude before
was, "I have this. It's a
thing." The--
Psychology... Okay, I'm just gonna go on a little
rant here, and we've only got a couple of minutes,
because psychology sold out. My industry
sold out to the insurance companies, which is why I
left the tribe. I'm still a professional psychologist.
I haven't practiced therapy in fifteen years or more
because
I don't believe that diagnosis is the same in
psychology as it is in oncology, for example, and even
that could use some improvement. But in psychology, we can't
give you a blood test to determine if you have
GAD. Let's just pick that one, generalized anxiety
disorder. There is no blood test. We
ask you questions. You answer those questions.
We say, "Oh, that means you have
this." No. This is a way of conceptualizing a
human experience. Anxiety
is here.
Anxiety is when our brain latches onto a story that it's
going to be worse, and we don't
know. So
h-having, ha-having a belief, holding onto a
belief that there is something inherently wrong with
you, that means that you have anxiety and always
will, I'm not sure that's serving you
well. Jen, I'm pretty sure
that it might be part of the problem.
And so how do, how do you
retire a diagnosis? You just, you choose.
N-notice that you're choosing to employ that
diagnosis right now. What if you fire it?
What if you fi-- What if you acknowledge that you bought it?
Not that you were given it. You bought it,
and you bought it through
probably
a, a, a flawed system of thinking
about humans. And there's some other things here that are really
resonating with you. You said in the, in the chat here, "I appreciate your model so
much." Yes, I do too. Remember,
positivity wasn't a plan. It was the
lifeline. All right, you
guys.
You're amazing. Thank you for joining us in this VIP
experience. There's still a few seats here.
If you know people who would really benefit from the bonus
material that we do here, access to the recordings, our special
guests like the amazing Natasha, thank you, Natasha, again for jumping in
today, please share it with them.
Uh, it's
theemotionalfreedomchallenge.com/getvip,
and you can just share The Emotional Freedom Challenge with people
too. Um, love to have them come in. All right,
you guys. You're awesome. I will see you tomorrow.
More good stuff happening. Let's create some emotional freedom.
See ya.